Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Science Fiction Chronicle is a major science fiction and fantasy news magazine distributed by Algal Press, which appears monthly.
It's publisher is Andrew Porter, who for most of his life has been a science fiction fan.
Porter told us how he discovered science fiction. It's a story familiar to most of us.
My brother was reading SF first. He's five years older than I am. So when he was 15, I was 10. I just started picking it up from him.
And he still reads SF, but obviously I have gone much further, much deeper into the subject than he would have ever dreamed of.
Porter went on to produce several fan publications, and he started Algal Magazine. Algal was later named Starship, which is still a viable magazine.
Porter founded Algal Press when his ambitions grew. Science Fiction Chronicle is another one of the productions of Algal Press.
We asked him who else is involved in running Algal Press.
When I started, I wanted to start publishing like chapbooks and books and stuff like that. I adopted the name Algal Press from Algal Magazine.
But it's not really, it's just sort of like the name of my press. And if I do chapbooks or books or something, I mean I did one book, really.
I did the book of Ellison, which is a real hardcover and a trade paperback.
But people think I work for this vast Algal Press. And of course also the appearance of Starship and Chronicle, like, wow, typesetting.
Starship has or at least had four cover covers. Well, he's got this vast organization behind him. He's not a fan at all, they say.
It's just on me, pasting stuff up my living room.
After having published several fan zines, Porter started Science Fiction Chronicle. It was the magazine he had always dreamed of doing.
So for years, I carried on my business card. You have a business card and it prices people and costs five bucks or five thousand.
I had a thing called SF Chronicle listed in there, you know, which was just a title. And it was like the Newsy Niles wanted to do it.
Finally in 1979, I started as a news section in Algal, which at that time had become Starship by then changed the title, a more hardcore SF title.
And it started out with, you know, getting subscriptions. So in other words, I actually started it with several hundred subscriptions.
And it was just a thing then the way I want to do it, like typesetting, nicely laid out, stuff like that.
Science Fiction Chronicle just had its fourth birthday. It's a rarity for a Science Fiction news magazine to have survived for so long.
Through the years, various people started up news zines. They've all folded. They've all gone away. They've all stopped publishing.
People got tired or they got tired of losing money or something. And it didn't. It's still here. It's doing pretty well. I mean, it's not.
I don't think it's making money yet, but it's at the break-even point, which is always nice. Advertising is increasing and now the recession is ending.
Things are starting to take off.
Why would a fan devote his life to producing a news magazine such as Science Fiction Chronicle, especially since it doesn't net him much profit?
Porter told us his reasons.
I've always loved Science Fiction. I mean, I could probably make a lot more money publishing a magazine with a lot of naked people in it, right?
Or, you know, or something, motorcycles or, you know, Hell's Angels official newsletters and something like that.
You know, if you don't buy this newsletter, it will kill you. One of those things. I don't know. But I just love Science Fiction. I've always loved Science Fiction.
And I can make my living doing something in Science Fiction. That's great.
Porter also gets a kick out of producing Science Fiction Chronicle.
The kick really is getting up when I feel like it. Working until when I feel like it. And not having a boss to yell at me and say, you screwed up.
And I screwed up and you're going to take the blame because I'm your boss.
We'll have more on our next show with publisher Andrew Porter.
What?
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show. So stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show. A commentary on Science Fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Algal Press is a one-man operation which publishes the magazine Starship, an occasional book, and the monthly trade newspaper, Science Fiction Chronicle.
Andrew Porter of Brooklyn is the one-man operator. He handles all aspects of the business.
From subscriptions to advertising, from editorializing to arranging the printing.
Recently we spoke with Porter and we asked him to describe a typical work day.
I get up anywhere from about 10.30 to 11.30.
And put around and I'll do stuff in the morning like entering financial stuff or getting checks ready for deposit.
And so I go into midtown and I hit a whole bunch of stuff and one stop on the subway.
There's my commercial bank for my accounts, Starship and SF Chronicles stuff.
And then two doors away there's my personal savings bank.
Across the street is the New York office of the printer I use.
And I can go in there and use their tie line to co-op the printer out in Pennsylvania and find out what that's doing.
Or I can deliver stuff that has to be, you know, they have a power system overnight.
There's a stationary store near there I use and my post office box is up there in Grand Central Station.
And the place where I have pictures developed.
And all that and you know, then I come back home and I'll do other stuff at night.
I like to work late at night, very quiet.
I have a TV going in the background and I watch Johnny Carson and then David Letterman comes on.
And then after that there's a very good news program called News Overnight at NBC, which has very tongue-in-cheek.
They do not ready for primetime news and other strange things.
And then if I'm really working straight through there's two issues, two episodes of Mary Tyler Moore come on.
I followed by an episode of Bob Newhart and by that time it's four in the morning and then I love Lucy Rerun comes around.
Usually I can't stand that and all so I just turn off the speaker.
Or else knock off the door earlier and then read.
The April 1983 issue of Science Fiction Chronicle had some startling headlines.
Cherry, Spinred, To-Wed collaborate.
The doll pays $50 million for New American Library.
The New England Science Fiction Association acquires Sherrith in Boston.
These turned out to be fictitious. They were an April Fools joke. Porter told us about it.
I asked people's permission to do that. I asked Don Warren's permission to do that story.
And I asked Cherry's permission and I asked Spinred.
And I arranged this sort of a matchmaker thing and saying, well, who would you like to get married to?
And Sherrith didn't mind Spinred and Spinred didn't mind Sherrith.
And I ran those stories and a heck of a lot of people believe those stories.
I understand that various writers were calling other writers out to read and there's issues over the phone and stuff.
And people who knew Spinred and knew he was planning to move out in the air said,
you slide down and you're going to move to Oklahoma, not Los Angeles.
And if it's set in tight, people believe it.
Porter promised there will be a special treat to appear in the April of 1984 issue of Science Fiction Chronicle.
For next April, I have two ideas I'm going to use.
And this one was kind of funny and humorous, like the thing with the New England Science Fiction Association buying the Sherrith in Boston.
And I have two ideas I'm going to use.
One is going to be either, I won't tell you what they are, the specific ideas,
but one will either be kind of interesting and humorous, or the other, it might be horrifying.
And I think we'll hear the hell out of a lot of people and it won't be humorous, but it's going to be possible.
It's going to be a possible story, but it's going to scare a lot of people.
And I think it might anger a lot of people too, but it'll be a hope.
More with Andrew Porter on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
Stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Ernest and Daryl Lane.
There are several professional science fiction magazines still in operation.
Amazing stories, analog, azimuth science fiction, and fantasy and science fiction are the present day survivors.
Scores of professional magazines have come and gone over the past 60 years.
There's a niche in science fiction though, which is filled by a handful of magazines published sporadically.
Like the professional monthly magazine, these semi-prozines, combined stories, articles, and interviews.
One such magazine is Starship, subtitled The Magazine About Science Fiction.
We talked recently with Starship's publisher, Andrew Porter of AlGol Press, who also produces a news magazine, Science Fiction Chronicles.
Porter told us that running such a magazine is certainly affected by the state of the economy.
Starship went from a reggware in 1972, went to twice a year, and then in 1974, I think, went to three times a year.
Maybe you don't like it or not. In 1977-78, it went to quarterly.
And then when the recession hit, I considered the whole, these last quote, two, one quote,
recessions we've had, and one big recession.
And then what happened to Starship happened across the field, or just across publishing period,
within the period of an issue or so, bookstore sales dropped by half the people just decided, you know,
it was more important to save their money or buy food or something like that.
And advertising dropped off a lot too.
And the best thing that happened was 1979 had one issue with 40 pages of advertising, with 90-some-out pages.
And that just dropped tremendously during the recession, all of this stuff dried up.
And it reached the point instead of making a small profit, it was making a small loss.
So the more issues I published, the more money it would make. So what was the point?
So basically, in the spending publications for the funding over a year.
In order for Starship to survive, Porter finds that he must constantly seek ways to lower production costs.
Here he tells us of one story.
The weird thing about Starship is, chronicle, I write most of it, and obviously I'm not paying myself for writing all his stuff.
Starship is all stuff where you have to pay for it, stuff of letters in the editorial.
The printing costs are much higher than chronicles because you've got four-color cover, a chrome coat, the print run at larger, the overall magazine.
Mailing costs are higher. It weighs more.
So what I did the last issue, I went from a four-color cover to a two-color cover.
And I think it looks good. It doesn't look like. I've seen other people do two-color and they do well.
The artwork is in blue and then the pipe is in black. So I'm using it like that.
So not having a four-color cover, I saved about $300 in cost of color separation and another $4, $500 in the printing.
Porter told us it's still another tactic for saving on the cost of production.
Remember, these strategies allow him to continue producing Starship.
This new issue, I'm not going to have a cover. It's going to be a self-cover, but it's going to be the outside form for the printing that's going to be two-color.
So it'll have an effect of two-color cover.
But not having that cover and just printing it on the run.
Actually, what I might do is I might run the outside form on slick paper.
So it'll be like eight pages of slick paper in the front, eight pages in the back, and then I'll encode the rest of it.
And that'll save the cost of having a Chrome-core cover and stuff. That'll save $900.
And how many copies you have to sell to make that $900?
So, and also it's gone twice a year now.
And it's basically the difference between doing something that'll make a small profit and something that'll lose.
And you can't probably something that can lose money.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show.
Production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show.
So stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show.
A commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Art of Mayhemar hit the fantasy scene in 1979 with several novels.
Since Mayhemar has a self-admitted pinch-it for using at least one unpronounceable word in each of his novels,
each title will in her tell you what she's written in the fantasy and science fiction genres.
In 1979, Double Day published How the Gods Wove in Kiranak.
In 80's, Double Day brought out The Seekers of Saranand.
81 brought the soul singer of Pyrrnot from Atheneum.
82 busted loose like a pot of popcorn.
Warlock F. came from Double Day in the spring.
Paperback reprints from Ace of How the Gods Wove in Seekers of Saranand came out that spring.
Breeze of the Liar came out from Atheneum that fall.
And Golden Dream of Ozzy Odyssey came out that fall.
So it sort of just grabbed you up like a tornado and carried you away spinning.
We asked Mayhemar what type of fantasy she writes.
It is really more toward heroic fantasy.
Though not in the disorders and sorceries type of thing.
These are more people who are heroic, not through physical strength or anything like that,
but because of the present circumstance and integrity.
I try to write about the way people can be and often are in real illness and in spas.
There is a place for that.
But I have never seen that the cause of human enlightenment has been forwarded too much
by depicting the absolute worst aspects of human nature.
People can be noble, they can be courageous.
And they very often are so why not write about it?
Since she is a poet as well, we asked Mayhemar if writing poetry helps her write prose.
I talk to a lot of college classes and I belong to a group that has beginners in it.
And I tell them, like poetry even is bad poetry.
Because in poetry you don't have a novel worth of elbow room.
You can't use 25 wrong words to get across an idea that two perfect words will give with puth, with real impact.
Poetry takes the laziness out of it.
It makes you search for the proper words, the proper phrases, exact construction that conveys what you want to give.
Mayhemar published her first novel after her children at home.
We asked her if she ever wishes she had gotten published earlier.
You know, I had given that a lot of thought.
It's a very rough road of hope.
But I have come to the conclusion that people have a great deal to say it, they're young.
Quite often don't keep pushing themselves to refine their technique, get better and better and better so that by golly you are so good they can't turn you down.
Besides which, you know, when you live for years, you know a lot of things you didn't know when you lived 25 years.
You understand not only what people do, but how they feel under different circumstances when a husband comes home and he's lost his job.
You not only know how he acts, you know how he and his wife feel about it.
And this is something that I think tells you the great deal of modern non-genre fiction to be superficial.
People are writing about it who has never stood in those views and who don't really understand what it does to your gut to have a child that's definitely only two o'clock in the morning.
You know, all these sort of things.
We'll have more with Ardeth Mayhemar on her next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Darrell Ang.
Ardeth Mayhemar is a nice Texas writer who recently began publishing in a variety of genres.
She has written several fantasy novels and one science fiction novel.
That being a continuation of the Fuzzy series started by the late H.B. Piper.
Mayhemar's contribution to that series is entitled Golden Dream, a fuzzy odyssey.
Mayhemar has written some westerns and she's working in other genres.
She manages to write a lot because she works so rapidly.
This is amazing because she lives on a farm and she has a lot of chores to do each day.
We ask Mayhemar to describe a typical day.
My husband and I get up at six. He has to go to town and open up his service space.
So I get up and fix breakfast for him at six.
And at eight fifteen comes the Postman.
So I'm standing there, I'm washing dishes, or I'm out there milking the cows.
And I'm listening for the Postman.
You know when Snoopy is a vulture when he's on top of his doghouse being a vulture?
That's the way I am with the Postman.
I milk one of the cows and turn the five calves in on her and her partner.
And ten feed the goats and feed the cats and feed the dogs.
And then I get the mail and look through.
And I get this interesting mail.
A lot of days I begin my real work.
Of course in among this I usually try to sweep the porch and straighten the stacks.
I've discovered you don't have to clean your living room if you keep your stacks straight.
So I straighten the stacks.
Then I hit the time fryer about nine o'clock usually.
And I may answer six letters before I start writing with them.
I would usually write depending on what I am engaged in from three to seven hours.
I can write a pretty fair size short story in two and a half, three hours.
But if I'm working on a book, then it's really hot.
Well I'll go right on through the three thirty four o'clock sometimes.
And I'm one of these lucky people.
I don't have to eat. I don't need to eat.
So I don't get hugged.
Don't have to interrupt myself.
And about three thirty or four of the goats start yelling at the pen.
I don't know why she yells at four o'clock.
But she usually does and that wakes me up and I think, you know, I don't know whether I can get my own bones up from here or not.
I'd better try and see, you know, among much creaking and groaning.
I'm hoist myself off the stool and straighten out and untrink the back.
And so that's then when I go out and oh I may dig in my garden or take a walk up our little road.
But time to get back is time to lick the cat all over again and milk the cows and put the calves on the feet of the goats and all that good stuff.
And then it's time to go supper up a papa and he gets home about six thirty.
And so we're pretty well ready to pack it in.
So Mayhars Farm Chores take up a great deal of her day.
We wondered if she might be more productive if she were to live in the city.
I am a peasant tonight, a toenate.
I am not happy.
I have lived in town periodically and have been miserable every minute.
Oh I had to live in Houston for sixteen months.
I thought I'd die.
In fact I think I would have died if we hadn't left.
We've always had a little slot of ground.
Maybe not for two acres, but something.
We've always had some kind of livestock.
When spring comes, if I can't get my hands at the dirt and make a garden, you just better buy a straight jacket and call the men in the white coats because I'm ready to go off.
I do my best writing, thinking in the garden, or even milking the cow.
The old head just keeps rolling right along.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.